>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JANUARY 2:
HUNDREDS ARE URGED TO EVACUATE
FROM THE DANGERS OF MIDWEST
FLOODING; THE CONGRESSIONAL
AGENDA FOR 2016 AS WASHINGTON
GETS BACK TO WORK; AND, WHY SOME
OF THE MILLIONS OF OWNERS OF
MANUFACTURED HOMES ARE
FACING UNEXPECTED FINANCIAL
CHALLENGES.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
RARE WINTER FLOODING CONTINUES
TO THREATEN THE MIDWEST, AND
HUNDREDS OF RESIDENTS REMAIN
EVACUATED FROM THEIR HOMES.
AFTER TEN INCHES OF RAIN FELL IN
THREE DAYS LAST WEEK, CITIES IN
ILLINOIS, MISSOURI AND ARKANSAS
ALONG THE SWOLLEN MISSISSIPPI
AND OTHER RIVERS ARE IN DANGER.
TODAY, ILLINOIS GOVERNOR BRUCE
RAUNER TOURED FLOODED AREAS AND
ACTIVATED NATIONAL GUARD
SOLDIERS TO ASSIST RECOVERY
EFFORTS.
HE'S DECLARED 12 COUNTIES
DISASTER AREAS.
AT LEAST 24 PEOPLE IN ILLINOIS
AND MISSOURI HAVE DIED IN THE
FLOODS, SOME SWEPT AWAY IN THEIR
VEHICLES.
FOUR PEOPLE ARE REPORTED
MISSING.
THE STATE OF EMERGENCY HAS ENDED
IN ST. LOUIS, WHERE FLOOD WATERS
ARE RECEDING AND THE CLEANUP
HAS BEGUN.
IRAQI OFFICIALS SAY A SUICIDE
ATTACK BY MILITANTS FROM THE
ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ AND SYRIA,
OR ISIS, KILLED THREE IRAQI
SOLDIERS AND WOUNDED 17 AT A
BASE NEAR RAMADI, IRAQ,
YESTERDAY.
AFTER THAT, SEVEN SUICIDE
BOMBINGS BY ISIS FOLLOWED IN AND
AROUND RAMADI, ACCORDING TO
IRAQI OFFICIALS.
THE IRAQI MILITARY SAYS IT HAS
RESCUED MORE THAN 50 IRAQI
FAMILIES ISIS WAS USING AS
HUMAN SHIELDS IN RAMADI AND
MOVED THEM TO SECURE LOCATIONS.
THE VIOLENCE COMES JUST AFTER
IRAQI FORCES RETOOK RAMADI
EARLIER THIS WEEK.
ISIS HAD SEIZED THE CITY
75 MILES WEST OF BAGHDAD
IN MAY.
SAUDI ARABIA'S MASS EXECUTIONS
TODAY OF A PROMINENT SHIITE
CLERIC AND 46 OTHER PRISONERS ON
TERRORISM CHARGES IS SPARKING
INTERNATIONAL OUTRAGE AND
REPRISALS.
IRAN'S SUPREME LEADER, AYATOLLAH
ALI KHAMENEI, DENOUNCED THE
EXECUTION OF SHEIK NIMR AL-NIMR
BY COMPARING SAUDI ARABIA TO
ISIS.
TONIGHT, PROTESTERS HAVE SET
FIRE TO THE SAUDI EMBASSY IN
IRAN'S CAPITAL OF TEHRAN AND
STORMED THE SAUDI CONSULATE IN
IRAN'S SECOND LARGEST CITY,
MESHAD.
EARLIER, SHI'ITE MUSLIMS IN
IRAN, PAKISTAN, OTHER PARTS OF
THE MIDDLE EAST AND EUROPE
PROTESTED THE SHEIK'S EXECUTION.
NIMR WAS A VOCAL CRITIC OF SAUDI
ARABIA'S SUNNI MONARCHY.
THE OTHERS EXECUTED WERE
ACTIVISTS IN THE SHI'ITE
MINORITY OR ALLEGED AL QAEDA
MEMBERS.
2016 WILL BE THE LAST FULL YEAR
OF THE OBAMA PRESIDENCY AND THE
PRESIDENT'S SIXTH YEAR IN A ROW
WORKING WITH A REPUBLICAN
CONGRESS.
ALREADY, REPUBLICANS SAY THEY
PLAN TO TRY AGAIN TO REPEAL
OBAMACARE.
THE PRESIDENT'S HANDLING OF THE
WAR ON ISLAMIC TERRORISM, THE
GUANTANAMO PRISON AND SYRIAN
REFUGEES ARE OTHER EXPECTED
CONFLICT POINTS,
THOUGH THERE MAY BE MORE
AGREEMENT ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE
REFORM AND TRADE TREATIES.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO LOOK AHEAD AT THE AGENDA ON
CAPITOL HILL IS NEWSHOUR
POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS.
LISA, JUST HAD YOUR STORY IN THE
MIDDLE OF THE WEEK ABOUT THE "DO
SOMETHING" CONGRESS.
WE DID GET SOME STUFF DONE ON
HIGHWAY TRANSPORTATION FUNDING
AND MAKING SOME TAX CUTS
PERMANENT.
BUT AS WE START THE NEW YEAR, IT
LOOKS LIKE THE REPEAL OF
OBAMACARE WILL ACTUALLY LAND AT
THE PRESIDENT'S DESK.
>> Reporter: SO, THAT'S RIGHT.
THEY'RE STARTING WITH SOME
CONTENTION ON ONE OF THE BIGGEST
POLITICAL ISSUES BUT, OF COURSE,
WE EXPECT A VETO ON THAT.
REPUBLICANS, PROBABLY, HARI,
WILL TRY TO PASS MORE REPEALS.
IT'S GOOD FOR THEM IN AN
ELECTION YEAR AND IT'S OBVIOUSLY
SOMETHING THEY FEEL STRONGLY
ABOUT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES IT
LOOK LIKE IN TERMS OF THINGS
THEY DO WANT TO GET
ACCOMPLISHED?
>> Reporter: HERE'S THE GOOD
NEWS.
THERE ARE SOME MAJOR PIECES OF
LEGISLATION TO WATCH THIS YEAR.
I THINK THE BIGGEST ONE BY FAR
IS CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM; TWO
REASONS I THINK THAT WE WILL SEE
MAJOR REFORM THIS YEAR OR THAT
IT'S LIKELY.
ONE IS THAT WANT WAY OUR PRISON
SYSTEM WORKS RIGHT NOW, HARI,
ABOUT TWO MILLION PRISONERS, AS
YOU MAY KNOW ARE, IN AMERICAN
PRISONS RIGHT NOW.
OF THOSE, THE VAST MAJORITY ARE
IN STATE PRISONS.
THAT'S RED STATES AND BLUE
STATES.
THEY'RE PAYING $20,000 A
PRISONER, AND THAT'S BEEN
CRIPPLING STATE BUDGETS.
RED STATES HAVE BEEN TRYING TO
LOOK FOR A WAY TO REFORM THE
SYSTEM.
ALL THAT AT THE SAME TIME AS
THERE'S AN INCREASING
RECOGNITION THAT ALL OF THESE
AMERICANS IN PRISON HAS A
LONG-TERM DEVASTATING EFFECT ON
FAMILIES AND ULTIMATELY ON THE
ECONOMY, ON EDUCATION.
SO, WRAPPING ALL THAT UP, WHAT
THAT GETS US TO A PLACE WHERE
SOME STAUNCH REPUBLICANS IN
CONGRESS, LIKE JOHN CORNYN OF
TEXAS, AND PRESIDENT OBAMA IN
THE WHITE HOUSE, ALL WANT TO FIX
THE SYSTEM.
THEY'VE PROPOSE AID BILL, HARI,
THAT DOES A LOT OF THINGS.
TWO BIG POINTS ON IT.
ONE, IT WOULD ROLL BACK THAT
THREE STRIKES RULE WHERE IF YOU
GET THREE STRIKES DRUG CRIMES
YOU'LL HAVE A MANDATORY LIFE
SENTENCE.
IT CANCELS THAT.
AND THE OTHER THING IT DOES IS
REVIEW THE SENTENCES FOR MOST
FEDERAL PRISONERS AND ALLOW
SOME OF THEM TO SPEND A QUARTER
OF THEIR SENTENCE AT HOME IF
THEY'RE THOUGHT TO BE
NONVIOLENT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS
DOESN'T HAPPEN IN A VACUUM, AS
YOU POINTED OUT.
THIS IS AN ELECTION YEAR.
HOW DOES THAT AFFECT THE
LEGISLATIVE AGENDA?
>> Reporter: I'M GOING TO
HOLD UP A LITTLE SHOW-AND-TELL
HERE.
THIS IS THE HOUSE CALENDAR, AND
THAT IS AFFECTED BY THE ELECTION
YEAR.
THERE ARE FOUR MONTHS THE HOUSE
WILL BE MOSTLY GONE, AND THAT'S
TO RUN FOR REELECTION; MOST OF
JULY, AUGUST, ALMOST ALL OF
OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER, LAWMAKERS
WILL NOT BE HERE.
THEIR PRIMARY JOB THIS YEAR, AS
MANY OF THEM SEE IT, IS PROBABLY
TO BE RE-ELECTED.
I THINK WE WILL SEE THEM RAISE
SOME ISSUES, ESPECIALLY
REPUBLICANS, THAT THEY THINK
HELP THEM, AND MAYBE HELP THEIR
PRESIDENTIAL CHANCES.
BECAUSE, HARI, THE SENATE IS A
PLACE THAT REPUBLICANS ARE A
LITTLE BIT WORRIED.
THEY'RE CONCERNED THAT THERE'S A
CHANCE THAT IF THINGS GO
DEMOCRATS' WAY IN GENERAL, THEY
COULD LOSE THE SENATE.
SO, WATCH HOUSE SPEAKER PAUL
RYAN, HARI.
SPEAKING TO HIM AND HIS STAFF, I
KNOW HE'S GOING TO TRY TO PUT
FORTH A VERY SERIOUS AGENDA,
PERHAPS ON THINGS LIKE
EDUCATION, HEALTH CARE.
I DON'T KNOW THAT THINGS WILL BE
PASSED, BUT HE WANTED TO TRY AND
SHOW THAT REPUBLICANS HAVE
POLICY IDEAS WHICH IS SOMETHING
HE AND I THINK OTHER LEADERS ARE
NOW ADMITTING HAS BEEN A PROBLEM
IN THE PAST FEW YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
PROSPECTS FOR A TRADE DEAL THAT
WE HEARD SO MUCH ABOUT THIS
YEAR?
>> Reporter: IT'S GOING TO BE
FASCINATING TO WATCH THAT, HARI.
THE PRESIDENT NEEDS A MAJORITY
VOTE IN BOTH THE HOUSE AND
SENATE BUT ALREADY SENATE LEADER
MITCH McCONNELL SAID HE
DOESN'T THINK THE VOTE WILL COME
BEFORE THE ELECTION.
IT'S GOING TO BE TOUCH AND GO
BUT WE'RE GOING TO WATCH IT
CLOSELY ALL YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, THE
NEWSHOUR'S LISA DESJARDINS
JOINING US FROM WASHINGTON.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE, HAPPY NEW YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: MANUFACTURED
HOMES, OFTEN CALLED TRAILERS OR
MOBILE HOMES, ACCOUNT FOR 6% OF
ALL AMERICAN RESIDENCES, AND
THEY'RE TWICE AS COMMON OUTSIDE
OF MAJOR CITIES.
PEOPLE WHO OWN MANUFACTURED
HOMES ARE TYPICALLY OLDER AND
LESS AFFLUENT THAN CONVENTIONAL
HOMEOWNERS, AND THEY'RE OFTEN
FORCED TO PAY HIGHER INTEREST
RATES ON THEIR HOME LOANS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
AS PART OF OUR "CHASING THE
DREAM" SERIES ON POVERTY IN
AMERICA, THE NEWSHOUR'S
STEPHEN FEE LOOKS AT THE
MANUFACTURED HOUSING MARKET--
AND GROWING CALLS FOR REFORM.
>> Reporter: IN 2006, CARLA BURR
WAS LOOKING FOR A NEW HOME.
AT THE TIME, SHE OWNED A
CONDOMINIUM IN MANASSAS,
VIRGINIA, JUST SOUTHWEST OF
WASHINGTON, D.C.
INITIALLY, SHE DIDN'T CONSIDER
A MOBILE, OR MANUFACTURED
HOME, BUT ON A FRIEND'S
RECOMMENDATION, SHE LOOKED
AT ONE IN NEARBY CHANTILLY,
VIRGINIA.
THE PRICE AND CONVENIENCE WON
HER OVER.
WHAT MADE YOU MOVE FROM A CONDO
TO A MANUFACTURED?
>> BEING ON ONE LEVEL.
MY CONDOMINIUM WAS FIFTEEN
STAIRS TO MY FRONT DOOR AND
FIFTEEN STAIRS INSIDE MY HOUSE
TO GET TO THE SECOND LEVEL.
AND WITH MY BACK AS BAD AS IT
WAS, I COULDN'T GO UP AND DOWN
THE STAIRS ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: SHE BOUGHT THIS
THREE-BEDROOM MANUFACTURED HOME
FOR $113,000, IN A TOWN WHERE
THE MEDIAN HOME VALUE IS
$500,000.
>> I CHOSE TO MOVE HERE BECAUSE
IT WAS A BEAUTIFUL HOUSE.
AND I THOUGHT, MAN I COULD
RETIRE HERE.
>> Reporter: NOW 61 YEARS OLD,
BURR AND HER HOME MAY NEED
TO MOVE.
WHILE SHE OWNS THE HOME--
SHE MADE THE PURCHASE IN CASH--
SHE DOESN'T OWN THE LAND
UNDERNEATH.
EVERY MONTH, BURR PAYS RENT TO A
PROPERTY MANAGER.
OVER THE PAST TEN YEARS, THAT
LOT RENT HAS GONE UP 30%, FROM
$740 A MONTH TO $1,022 A MONTH.
>> I HAD NO CLUE THAT THE RENT
WAS GOING TO GO UP THE WAY IT
DID.
I MEAN, IT'S TO THE POINT NOW
WHERE IT'S MORE THAN HALF MY
SOCIAL SECURITY.
I WOULD LOVE TO STAY.
AND I WOULD LOVE TO KEEP IT
RIGHT WHERE IT IS.
BECAUSE EVERYTHING I HAVE IS
HERE.
ALL MY CHURCH IS HERE, MY
FAMILY'S HERE, EVERYBODY'S HERE.
>> Reporter: BURR IS ONE OF
ABOUT 20 MILLION AMERICANS WHO
LIVE IN MANUFACTURED HOMES,
BUILDINGS MADE IN FACTORIES AND
THEN TOWED TO COMMUNITIES OR
PRIVATE LAND.
WHILE THEY'RE "MOBILE," MOST
NEVER MOVE ONCE THEY'RE PLACED
ON A PROPERTY.
WHEELS AND TRAILER HITCHES ARE
REMOVED.
DRIVING BY, A MANUFACTURED HOME
COMMUNITY CAN LOOK JUST LIKE A
CONVENTIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD.
THE AVERAGE PRICE OF A NEW
MANUFACTURED HOME: $64,000, A
FIFTH OF THE $325,000 AVERAGE
PRICE OF A NEW CONVENTIONAL
HOME.
>> MANUFACTURED HOMES ARE NOT
TRAILERS; THEY'RE ACTUALLY
MEANT TO STAY IN ONE PLACE.
>> Reporter: JULIA GORDON IS
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT OF THE
NATIONAL COMMUNITY STABILIZATION
TRUST, WHICH ADVOCATES FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> MANUFACTURED HOUSING IS A
VERY IMPORTANT SOURCE OF
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR MANY
PEOPLE, ESPECIALLY THOSE WHO
LIVE IN MORE RURAL AREAS.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, IN 112
RURAL COUNTIES IN THE SOUTH AND
WEST, MORE THAN A THIRD OF
HOUSES ARE MANUFACTURED.
BUT ONLY 48% OF HOUSEHOLDS WHO
LIVE IN MANUFACTURED HOMES OWN
BOTH THE HOUSE AND THE LAND;
30% OWN THE HOUSE AND RENT THE
LAND; AND 18% RENT BOTH.
>> THIS IS A UNIQUE PROBLEM OF
MANUFACTURED HOUSING, THAT THE
OWNERSHIP OF THE ACTUAL DWELLING
IS SEPARATE FROM THE OWNERSHIP
OF THE LAND UNDER IT.
>> Reporter: IT'S A PROBLEM FOR
80-YEAR-OLD BOB THOMPSON.
HE AND HIS WIFE BOUGHT THIS
MANUFACTURED HOME IN WINCHESTER,
VIRGINIA, FOR $90,000 IN 2003.
>> NO MORE MOWING LAWNS, NO MORE
HAVING TO TAKE CARE OF THE SNOW
AND THOSE KIND OF THINGS THAT AS
YOU GET OLDER, YOU'RE WANTING TO
DOWNSIZE YOUR HOUSE SIZE.
>> Reporter: LIKE CARLA BURR,
THEY OWN THE HOME BUT NOT THE
LAND UNDERNEATH.
>> WHEN WE COME HERE IN 2003,
THE LOT RENT WAS $260 A MONTH.
AND NOW IT WILL BE $508 OR $509
A MONTH.
>> Reporter: HAS YOUR INCOME
CHANGED OVER THAT PERIOD OF
TIME?
>> NO, NOT VERY MUCH, BECAUSE
WE'RE ON FIXED INCOME, AND ON
SOCIAL SECURITY, AND YOU KNOW,
THEY MIGHT GET A 1% OR 2% RAISE
PER YEAR, BUT THAT'S ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: THOMPSON SAYS THAT
IF THE LOT RENT CONTINUES TO
RISE, HE, HIS WIFE, AND THEIR
TEENAGE GRANDSON WHO LIVES WITH
THEM WILL HAVE TO SELL, OR PAY
TO HAVE THE HOUSE LIFTED UP,
PLACED BACK ON WHEELS AND MOVED
TO A NEW LOCATION, WHICH CAN
COST UP TO $15,000.
>> BUT IF YOU CAN'T AFFORD THE
LOT RENT, HOW ARE YOU GOING TO
SPEND THAT KIND OF MONEY TO MOVE
IT OFF SITE?
>> Reporter: IF YOU HAD TO SELL
TOMORROW, WOULD YOU BE ABLE TO
RECOUP THE INVESTMENT YOU MADE
IN THIS HOUSE?
>> NO.
THESE HOUSES WERE BRAND NEW, SO
IT WAS THREE YEARS OLD WHEN WE
BOUGHT IT AND PAID THAT KIND OF
MONEY FOR IT.
AND SOME OF THE, ON HERE, I
WOULD SAY THAT NORMALLY $35,000
TO $40,000 WOULD BE A HIGH END
FOR THIS HOUSE AT THIS POINT.
>> Reporter: SO THAT WOULD MEAN
BASICALLY A DROP IN 50% FROM
YOUR PURCHASE PRICE.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: LIKE CARS,
MANUFACTURED HOMES OFTEN
DEPRECIATE, LOSING VALUE THE
LONGER THEY'RE OWNED.
CARLA BURR BELIEVES THE VALUE OF
HER MANUFACTURED HOME HAS
PLUMMETED SINCE SHE PURCHASED A
DECADE AGO.
SHE THINKS IF SHE SOLD IT TODAY,
SHE'D GET $40,000 LESS THAN SHE
PAID.
>> IF YOU'RE IN AN APARTMENT,
YOU CAN MOVE.
AT THE END OF YOUR LEASE YOU CAN
SAY, I'M OUTTA HERE, IT'S TOO
HIGH.
I CAN'T.
I DON'T HAVE THAT LUXURY.
THIS HOUSE CAN'T MOVE.
I MEAN UNLESS YOU GO THROUGH
MAJOR HOOPS TO DO IT.
>> Reporter: DICK ERNST CHAIRS
THE FINANCIAL SERVICES DIVISION
OF THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING
INSTITUTE, WHICH REPRESENTS
BUILDERS, COMMUNITY OWNERS, AND
LENDERS.
I ASKED HIM ABOUT THE DILEMMA
BOB THOMPSON AND CARLA BURR ARE
FACING.
>> Reporter: THEY FEEL LOCKED
IN.
IS THAT A COMMON PROBLEM?
>> WELL I MEAN, IT'S A
CUSTOMER'S CHOICE.
IF THEY CHOOSE A LIFESTYLE IN A
LAND-LEASE COMMUNITY, FOR
EXAMPLE, VERSUS ON A PIECE OF
PROPERTY THAT THEY CAN BUY OR
PURCHASE SOMEPLACE IN RURAL
AMERICA OR WHEREVER, THAT'S A
CHOICE THAT CONSUMER IS MAKING.
YOU DO REMOVE THAT APPRECIATING
PORTION OF THE TRANSACTION IF
YOU HAVE NO REAL ESTATE WITH IT.
>> Reporter: MANUFACTURED HOMES
ON RENTED LAND ARE OFTEN
CONSIDERED PERSONAL PROPERTY,
NOT REAL ESTATE, AND, AS A
RESULT, BANKS SOMETIMES WON'T
GRANT BUYERS TYPICAL MORTGAGES,
WHICH LEADS TO HIGHER INTEREST
RATES.
THE BEST FINANCING CARLA BURR
COULD GET FOR HER MANUFACTURED
HOME WAS TWICE AS EXPENSIVE AS
HER OLD CONDOMINIUM, SO SHE PAID
CASH.
>> I HAD A 4.875 MORTGAGE IN
2006 ON MY CONDO.
AND THE BEST I COULD GET WAS
10%.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
LATEST FIGURES, MANUFACTURED
HOME LOANS HAVE INTEREST RATES
NEARLY 3% HIGHER THAN
CONVENTIONAL MORTGAGES.
ONE REASON RATES ARE HIGHER:
LIMITED CHOICE.
SOME MANUFACTURED HOME LENDERS
ARE OWNED BY THE SAME COMPANIES
THAT MAKE MANUFACTURED HOMES.
>> OFTEN YOU HAVE VERY FEW
FINANCING OPTIONS.
THERE ARE ONLY A HANDFUL OF
LENDERS WHO WORK IN THIS SPACE,
AND BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT OF
VERTICAL INTEGRATION IN THE
INDUSTRY OFTEN WHEN YOU PURCHASE
THE HOME, THE MANUFACTURER OF
THE HOME IS GOING TO REFER YOU
TO A LENDER.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER FACTOR
DRIVING UP BORROWING COSTS FOR
MANUFACTURED HOMES-- THE DEFAULT
RATE IS MUCH HIGHER THAN ON
CONVENTIONAL MORTGAGES.
INDUSTRY ANALYSTS SAY IT'S AS
HIGH AS 25%, A FIGURE
MANUFACTURED HOME LENDERS
DISPUTE.
>> THE REASON FOR THE VERY HIGH
DEFAULT RATES IN MANUFACTURED
HOUSING, FRANKLY, IS BECAUSE
MANY OF THE LOANS ARE SO
PREDATORY.
AND A VERY HIGH-RATE LOAN
ACTUALLY CARRIES WITH IT EXTRA
RISK OF DEFAULT THAN THE SAME
LOAN TO THE SAME PERSON THAT'S A
LOWER RATE, BECAUSE OF COURSE
IT'S MORE EXPENSIVE, AND IT'S
TAKING UP MORE OF THEIR INCOME.
>> Reporter: WHAT DOES THAT SAY
TO YOU WHEN PEOPLE ARE OUT THERE
CALLING YOUR INDUSTRY, SAYING
THAT YOU'RE PREYING ON PEOPLE
WHO ARE LOW-INCOME AND
VULNERABLE?
>> IT'S NOT A GOOD FEELING TO
HEAR THAT, BECAUSE WE THINK THAT
THEY'RE MISGUIDED.
>> Reporter: ERNST SAYS HIS
INDUSTRY'S LOAN RATES ARE HIGHER
THAN CONVENTIONAL HOME LOANS, IN
PART, BECAUSE THE BUYERS DO HAVE
WORSE CREDIT AND BECAUSE THERE
IS NO MARKET FOR LENDERS TO
PACKAGE THE DEBT AS WALL STREET
SECURITIES.
>> YOU'RE ALSO GOING TO HAVE TO
BUILD SOMETHING IN THERE FOR THE
CREDIT RISK.
YOU HAVE TO COVER YOUR COST FOR
ORIGINATION, COVER YOUR COST OF
SERVICING.
SO IF YOU, IF YOU WERE TO BREAK
AN INTEREST RATE DOWN, YOU WOULD
ABSOLUTELY SEE VERY CLEARLY THAT
THEY'RE DOING IT BECAUSE THEY
HAVE TO.
>> Reporter: THE DODD-FRANK
FINANCIAL REFORM LAW PASSED BY
CONGRESS AND SIGNED BY PRESIDENT
OBAMA IN 2010 PROVIDED CONSUMER
PROTECTIONS FOR BORROWERS OF
HIGH-COST LOANS, BARRING THINGS
LIKE BALLOON PAYMENTS--
OVERSIZED PAYMENTS DUE AT THE
END OF A LOAN-- AND REQUIRING
CREDIT COUNSELING.
BUT THE MANUFACTURED HOUSING
INSTITUTE IS LOBBYING FOR NEW
LEGISLATION TO CHANGE THE
DEFINITION OF A HIGH-COST LOAN,
BOOSTING THE INTEREST RATE
THRESHOLD SO THAT FEWER
MANUFACTURED HOME LOANS WILL BE
CLASSIFIED THAT WAY.
ISN'T THAT WHAT GOT US INTO
TROUBLE IN THE FIRST PLACE WITH
THE SITE BUILT MARKET?
THAT WE WERE EXTENDING LOANS
THAT WEREN'T UNDERWRITTEN VERY
WELL.
THAT THE SECURITIZATION WAS OUT
OF CONTROL.
AND THAT DROVE US INTO THE
LARGEST HOUSING CRISIS IN
DECADES.
>> SURE, BUT MAKE NO MISTAKE,
WHAT WE'RE ASKING FOR RETAINS
ALL OF THOSE PROTECTIONS FOR THE
CONSUMERS SO THAT MORE, SO THE
CONSUMERS CAN STAY IN THEIR
HOMES.
WE'RE NOT ASKING THAT ANY OF
THOSE CONSUMER PROTECTIONS BE
TAKEN AWAY.
WE'RE JUST ASKING THAT WE HAVE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE LOANS
AND CUSTOMERS LIVING IN
MANUFACTURED HOMES THAT WANT TO
SELL THEM HAVE FINANCING
AVAILABLE.
>> Reporter: ERNST SAYS THE
LEGISLATIVE CHANGE HE ADVOCATES
WOULD FREE UP CREDIT FOR
BORROWERS, AND IT'S ALREADY
PASSED THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
BUT HOUSING ADVOCATES LIKE JULIA
GORDON SAY CHANGING THE LAW
WOULD BE A MISTAKE.
>> WHAT CONCERNS ME IS THAT
PEOPLE WHO BUY MANUFACTURED
HOMES OFTEN ARE LOWER INCOME,
PERHAPS LESS FINANCIALLY
SOPHISTICATED, MAYBE HAVE FEWER
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THEM.
THESE ARE THE VERY VULNERABLE
CONSUMERS WHO NEED THOSE
PROTECTIONS THE MOST.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
VOWED TO VETO ANY BILL THAT
WOULD WEAKEN THE HOMEOWNER
PROTECTIONS IN DODD FRANK.
MEANWHILE, MANUFACTURED HOMES
ARE RE-GAINING POPULARITY.
AS OF OCTOBER 2015, NEW
MANUFACTURED HOME SHIPMENTS ARE
UP NEARLY 8% FROM THE PREVIOUS
YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: OREGON'S CRATER
LAKE IS THE DEEPEST IN
THE COUNTRY AND THE CENTERPIECE
OF A NATIONAL PARK.
IN RECENT YEARS, THE LAKE'S
WATER TEMPERATURE HAS BEEN ON
THE RISE, AND THOSE WARMER
WATERS ATTRACT CRAYFISH THAT ARE
NOW PUTTING THE LAKE'S NATIVE
CREATURES AND CLARITY AT RISK.
CORRESPONDENT JES BURNS OF
OREGON PUBLIC BROADCASTING AND
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC MEDIA
PARTNERSHIP "EARTHFIX" HAS THIS
REPORT.
>> Reporter: BIOLOGIST MARK
BUKTENICA IS SCOURING THE
SHORELINE OF CRATER LAKE.
FLYING ANTS, LIZARDS, AND SMALL
TOADS ARE EVERYWHERE.
>> AREN'T THEY CUTE?
>> Reporter: BUT THE CRITTER
HE'S LOOKING FOR IS MUCH MORE
ELUSIVE.
THEN HIS PERSISTENCE PAYS OFF.
THIS IS THE MAZAMA NEWT.
>> THE MAZAMA NEWT FOUND NO
PLACE ELSE IN THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: CRATER LAKE FORMED
NEARLY 8,000 YEARS AGO, AFTER
MT. MAZAMA ERUPTED AND THE
CALDERA BEGAN FILLING WITH
RAINWATER.
>> WE DON'T KNOW WHEN NEWTS
ENTERED THE CALDERA BUT SOME
TIME THOUSANDS OF YEARS AGO.
>> Reporter: THERE WERE NO FISH
OR OTHER PREDATORS IN THE NEWLY-
FORMED LAKE, AND THE MAZAMA NEWT
EXPANDED AND THRIVED.
IT WAS THE UNDISPUTED TOP OF THE
FOOD CHAIN.
BUT NOT ANYMORE.
BECAUSE CRAWLING BENEATH THE
SURFACE OF THE LAKE, A NEW
CHAMPION HAS EMERGED.
THE SIGNAL CRAYFISH.
THEIR STORY BEGINS MORE THAN 100
YEARS AGO.
TO ATTRACT VISITORS EARLY
CONSERVATIONISTS BEGAN STOCKING
THE LAKE WITH GAME FISH LIKE
TROUT AND SALMON.
CRAIG ACKERMAN IS PARK
SUPERINTENDENT.
>> IN THE PAST, THE NATIONAL
PARKS HAVE DONE MANY THINGS
WHICH PEOPLE THOUGHT WERE GOOD
IDEAS AT THE TIME, THAT TURNED
OUT TO BE NOT SO GREAT IDEAS.
>> Reporter: IN 1915, PARK
MANAGERS INTRODUCED THE SIGNAL
CRAYFISH TO FEED THOSE FISH.
>> AND THAT TURNED OUT TO BE A
WORSE DECISION THAN STOCKING THE
FISH IN THE FIRST PLACE, BECAUSE
THE CRAYFISH HAVE BECOME OUT OF
CONTROL.
>> Reporter: AND THIS IS OBVIOUS
OUT IN THE LAKE.
SCIENTISTS AT THE PARK ARE
FINDING THAT CRAYFISH AND MAZAMA
NEWTS DON'T REALLY GET ALONG.
>> WE HAVE A STAND-OFF.
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN?
>> Reporter: NOT ONLY DO THEY
COMPETE FOR THE SAME FOOD, BUT
STUDIES DONE BY PARK BIOLOGISTS
SHOW CRAYFISH CHASE AND HARASS
THE NEWTS, CAUSING THEM TO FLEE.
AND IN SOME CASES, MUCH WORSE.
>> THEY'RE VIRTUALLY THE PERFECT
INVADER.
THE MAZAMA NEWT ON THE OTHER
HAND, IS AN IDEAL PREY.
>> Reporter: AFTER THOUSANDS OF
YEARS EVOLVING WITHOUT
PREDATORS, THE NEWT LOST IT'S
BEST WEAPON, A POTENT
NEUROTOXIN THAT CAN KILL.
>> WITH THE LOSS OF ITS
TOXICITY, IT'S LEFT VIRTUALLY
DEFENSELESS.
>> Reporter: BUT ACTUALLY,
CRAYFISH IN CRATER LAKE WEREN'T
THOUGHT TO BE SUCH A PROBLEM
UNTIL RELATIVELY RECENTLY.
SURVEYING STARTED IN 2008, AND
SCIENTISTS FOUND NEWTS HAD THE
ADVANTAGE, OCCUPYING ABOUT HALF
THE SHORELINE.
THE CRAYFISH HAD MOST OF THE
REST.
BY 2014, THE CRAYFISH HAD TAKEN
OVER 75% OF THE SHALLOWS.
>> I GOT IT!
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S NOT ALL,
SAYS BIOLOGIST JOHN UMEK.
>> CRAYFISH ARE IMPACTING ALL
THE ORGANISMS IN THE NEAR SHORE,
NOT ONLY NEWTS.
FOR INSTANCE, IN CRAYFISH AREAS
WE DON'T FIND SNAILS.
YOU HAVE TO GO OUTSIDE THE
CRAYFISH DOMINATED AREAS TO EVEN
FIND A SNAIL OR TWO.
INSTEAD OF THIS GREAT
BIO-DIVERSITY AREA, IT'S DOWN TO
ONE OR TWO ORGANISMS AND THAT'S
IT, BESIDES CRAYFISH.
>> Reporter: WITHOUT THESE TINY
ORGANISMS EATING THE ALGAE, THE
CRYSTAL BLUE CLARITY OF CRATER
LAKE COULD BE AT RISK.
CRATER LAKE BIOLOGIST SCOTT
GIRDNER SUSPECTS THAT CLIMATE
CHANGE IS PLAYING A ROLE.
THE SURFACE TEMPERATURE OF THE
LAKE HAS INCREASED ABOUT THREE
DEGREES IN THE PAST 10-15 YEARS.
>> AND IT MAY JUST ALLOW THE
CRAYFISH TO MOVE FASTER.
THEY'RE JUST MORE ACTIVE AT
WARMER WATERS.
AND IT MAY ALLOW THEM TO HAVE
MORE SUCCESSFUL REPRODUCTION,
THEIR NUMBERS HAVE INCREASED
FASTER NOW.
>> Reporter: AT THIS POINT NO
ONE KNOWS EXACTLY WHAT TO DO.
TRAPPING-- EVEN INTENSIVE
TRAPPING-- HASN'T MADE A DENT.
YET THERE ARE A FEW GLIMMERS OF
HOPE FOR THE MAZAMA NEWT.
THERE'S THE POSSIBILITY OF
BUILDING UNDERWATER BARRIERS OR
FENCES TO SLOW CRAYFISH
EXPANSION.
CONTROLLING THE SIGNAL CRAYFISH
AND PROTECTING THIS UNIQUE
ECOSYSTEM WILL BE LABOR
INTENSIVE AND EXPENSIVE.
THE SOBERING REALITY IS,
CRAYFISH WILL LIKELY NEVER BE
ELIMINATED FROM CRATER LAKE.
AND MAYBE THE BEST THE NATIONAL
PARK CAN HOPE TO DO, IS CARVE
OUT A FEW SAFE HAVENS FOR THE
MAZAMA NEWT.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: ISRAELI POLICE
REMAIN ON "HEIGHTENED ALERT"
SEARCHING FOR A GUNMAN WHO
KILLED TWO PEOPLE OUTSIDE A TEL
AVIV BAR YESTERDAY.
THE GUNMAN, IDENTIFIED AS A
31-YEAR-OLD ISRAELI ARAB, ALSO
WOUNDED THREE PEOPLE BEFORE HE
FLED.
SINCE OCTOBER, 21 ISRAELIS AND
AT LEAST 132 PALESTINIANS HAVE
DIED IN A WAVE OF STREET
VIOLENCE.
FUNERALS WERE HELD TODAY IN THE
WEST BANK CITY OF HEBRON FOR 17
PALESTINIANS.
THEY WERE KILLED BY ISRAELI
POLICE OR SOLDIERS, AFTER
CARRYING OUT ATTACKS ON
ISRAELI CIVILIANS.
THE NEW YEAR HAS ALREADY USHERED
IN A NEW LOW IN RELATIONS
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND
RUSSIA.
FOR THE FIRST TIME, THE KREMLIN
NAMES THE U.S. AS A THREAT TO
RUSSIA'S NATIONAL SECURITY IN A
DECREE SIGNED BY RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN.
RUSSIA ALSO NAMED THE EXPANSION
OF WESTERN MILITARY ALLIANCE
NATO AS A THREAT.
THE DECREE ASSERTS RUSSIA'S
GROWING GLOBAL ROLE HAS
TRIGGERED A "COUNTER-ACTION"
BY THE U.S. AND ITS ALLIES IN
TRYING TO DOMINATE WORLD
AFFAIRS.
RUSSIA ALSO ACCUSES THE U.S.
AND EUROPEAN UNION OF
SUPPORTING WHAT IT CALLS,"
AN ANTI-CONSTITUTIONAL COUP IN
UKRAINE" WHERE RUSSIA HAS
ANNEXED THE CRIMEAN PENINSULA
AND IS ACCUSED OF BACKING
ANTI-GOVERNMENT REBELS.
THE ISLAMIC MILITANT GROUP
AL-SHABAB, THE AL QAEDA
AFFILIATE BASED IN SOMALIA, IS
USING A CLIP OF REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE DONALD
TRUMP IN A NEW RECRUITING VIDEO.
AL-SHABAB RELEASED THE 51-MINUTE
LONG VIDEO ON TWITTER YESTERDAY.
AIMED AT AMERICAN MUSLIMS, THE
VIDEO FEATURES TRUMP CALLING FOR
A BAN ON MUSLIMS ENTERING THE
U.S., WHICH HE DID AFTER THE
MASS SHOOTING IN SAN BERNARDINO,
CALIFORNIA, LAST MONTH.
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE HILLARY CLINTON SAID
IN A DEBATE TWO WEEKS AGO THAT
ISIS WAS USING TRUMP'S STATEMENT
AS A RECRUITING TOOL, WHICH WAS
UNPROVEN AT THE TIME.
ON THE NEXT PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND, HOW OREGON PLANS TO
TRAIN THE NEXT GENERATION OF
BLUE COLLAR WORKERS.
>> WE HAVE TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
JOBS IN VERY TRADITIONAL
MANUFACTURING AREAS, AND THERE
IS NO WAY THAT WE'RE GOING TO
FILL THAT THROUGH OUR
TRADITIONAL MEANS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY,
FORMER ARKANSAS GOVERNOR AND
FOUR-TERM U.S. SENATOR DALE
BUMPERS HAS DIED.
KNOWN FOR HIS WIT AND ORATORY,
BUMPERS WAS A MENTOR TO FORMER
PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON, WHO SAID
IN A STATEMENT TODAY, "I LOVED
HIM."
DURING CLINTON'S IMPEACHMENT
TRIAL IN 1999, BUMPERS MADE AN
IMPASSIONED SPEECH ON THE SENATE
FLOOR DEFENDING THE PRESIDENT.
BUMPERS DIED LAST NIGHT AT HIS
HOME IN LITTLE ROCK.
HE WAS 90 YEARS OLD.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.